Abenjukala::The classic treatise on benjuka, written anonymously in Near Antiquity. Because of its emphasis on the relation between benjuka and wisdom, many consider it a classic philosophical text as well.
Absolute::Among the Dûnyain, the state of becoming “unconditioned,” a perfect self-moving soul independent of “what comes before.” See Dûnyainand Conditioning, the.
Abstractions::An epithet for Gnostic sorceries.
Adûnyani::“Little Dûnyain” (Kûniüric from Ûmeritic ar’tûnya, or “little truth”). The name taken by the followers assembled by Kellhus in Atrithau.
Aëngelas::(4087-4112) A Werigdan warrior.
Aethelarius VI::(4062- )(Sheyic form of Athullara) The King of Atrithau, last of the line of Morghund.
Agansanor::A province of south central Ce Tydonn, noted for the martial zeal of its sons.
Age of Bronze::Another name for Far Antiquity, during which bronze was the dominant technology of Men.
Age of Cenei::The era of Ceneian dominance of the Three Seas, from the conquest of Nilnamesh in 2478 until the Sack of Cenei in 3351.
Age of Kyraneas::The era of Kyranean dominance of the northwestern Three Seas.
Age of Warring Cities::The era following the dissolution of Kyraneas (c. 2158) until the rise of Cenei, characterized by perpetual warfare between the cities of the Kyranae Plain.
Aghurzoi::“Cut Tongue” (Ihrimsû) The language of the Sranc.
Agmundr::A province of northeastern Galeoth, located beneath the Osthwai Mountains.
Agnotum Market::The main bazaar of Iothiah, dating back to the days of Cenei.
agoglian bulls::Ancient Kyranean symbols of virility and fortune. The most famous examples are found in the Hagerna opposite the Vault-of-the-Tusk.
Agongorea::“Fields of Woe” (Kûniüric) The blasted lands to the west of the River Sursa and north of the Neleost Sea.
Agonic Collar::A sorcerous artifact of the Ancient North, reputedly crafted by the Mihtrulic Gnostic School. According to Mandate scholars, the purpose of the Agonic Collar was analogous to that of the Uroborian Circle utilized by the Anagogic Schools of the Three Seas, namely, to inflict excruciating pain on the wearer should he attempt to utter any sorcerous incantation.
Agonies::The name for the Gnostic Cants of Torment, a reputed specialty of the Mangaecca.
Ainoni::The language of High Ainon, derived from Ham-Kheremic.
Ajencis::(c. 1896-2000)—The father of syllogistic logic and algebra, held by many to be the greatest of all philosophers. Born in the Kyranean capital of Mehtsonc, he is reputed to have never once left his city, even during the horrific plagues of 1991, when his advanced age made his death a near certainty. (According to various sources, Ajencis bathed on a daily basis and refused to drink water drawn from city wells, claiming that these practices, combined with a distaste for drunkenness and a moderate diet, were the keys to his health.) Many commentators, both antique and contemporary, complain that there are as many Ajencises as there are readers of Ajencis. Though this is certainly true of his more speculative works (such as Theophysics or The First Analytic of Men), his work does possess a discernible and consistent sceptical core, primarily exemplified in The Third Analytic of Men, which also happens to be his most cynical work. For Ajencis, Men by and large “make their weaknesses, not reason or the world, the primary measure of what they hold true.” In fact, he observed that most individuals possess no criteria whatsoever for their beliefs. As a so-called critical philosopher, one might have supposed he would eventually share the fate of other critical philosophers, such as Porsa (the famed “Philosopher-Whore” of Trysë) or Kumhurat. Only his reputation and the structure of Kyranean society saved him from the vicissitudes of the mob. As a child, he was allegedly such a prodigy that the High King himself took notice of him, granting him what was called Protection at the unprecedented age of eight. Protection was an ancient and hallowed Kyranean institution; the “Protected” were those who could say anything without fear of reprisal, even to the High King. Ajencis continued speaking until he suffered a stroke and died at the venerable age of 103.
Ajokli::The God of thievery and deception. Though listed among the primary Gods in The Chronicle of the Tusk, there is no true Cult of Ajokli, but rather an informal network of devotees scattered across the great cities of the Three Seas. Ajokli is oft mentioned in the secondary scriptures of the different Cults, sometimes as a mischievous companion of the Gods, other times as a cruel or malicious competitor. In the Mar’eddat, he is the faithless husband of Gierra.
Ajowai::A mountain fastness in the north Hinayati Mountains that serves as the administrative capital of Girgash.
akal::The base monetary unit of Kian.
Akkeägni::The God of disease. Also known as the God of a Thousand Hands. Scholars have oft noted the irony that the Priesthood of Disease provides the primary repository of physicians for the Three Seas. How can one at once worship disease and war against it? According to the scriptures of the Cult, thePiranavas, Akkeägni is a so-called Bellicose God, one who favours those who strive against him over sycophants and worshippers.
Akksersia::A lost nation of the Ancient North. Though the White Norsirai of the north shore of the Cerish Sea lacked any sustained contact with the Nonmen, they gradually became the second great seat of Norsirai civilization. Akksersia was founded in 811 by Salaweärn I, following the dissolution of the Cond Yoke. Though confined to the city of Myclai, her commercial and administrative capital, the nation gradually extended its hegemony, first along the length of the River Tywanrae, then across the plains of Gâl and the entire north shore of the Cerish Sea. By the time of the First Great Sranc War in 1251, it was the largest of the ancient Norsirai nations, incorporating almost all the White Norsirai tribes save those of the Istyuli Plains. It fell to the No-God after three disastrous defeats in 2149. Akksersian colonists on the Cerish Sea’s heavily forested south shore would form the nucleus of what would become the Meörn Empire.
Akksersian::The lost language of ancient Akksersia, and “purest” of the Nirsodic tongues.
Akkunihor::A Scylvendi tribe of the central Steppe. As the tribe closest to the Imperial frontier, the Akkunihor are the traditional brokers of Three Seas rumour and knowledge among the Scylvendi.
Algari::(4041-4111)—A body-slave to Prince Nersei Proyas.
Alkussi::A Scylvendi tribe of the central Steppe. “All heaven cannot shine through a single crack ...”—The famous line attributed to the poet Protathis suggesting that no man can be trusted with divine revelation.
Allosian Forum, Allosian::The great judicial galleries located at the foot of the Andiamine Heights.
Am-Amidai::A large Kianene fortress located in the heart of the Atsushan Highlands, raised in 4054.
amicut::A ration used by Scylvendi warriors on the trail, consisting of wild herbs and berries beaten into dried sections of beef.
Ammegnotis::A city on the south bank of the River Sempis, raised during the Kyranean New Dynasty.
Amortanea::The merchant carrack that bore Achamian and Xinemus to Joktha.
Amoteu::A governorate of Kian, located on the southern edge of the Meneanor Sea. Like all the nations in the shadow of the Betmulla Mountains, Amoteu, or Holy Amoteu as it is sometimes called, grew in the influential shadow of Old Dynasty Shigek. According to extant inscriptions, the Shigeki referred to both Xerash and Amoteu as Hut-Jartha, the “Land of the Jarti,” or as HutiParota, the “Middle-Lands.” The Jarti were the dominant Ketyai tribe of the region, to which the Amoti and several others were tributaries before the Shigeki conquest. But with the extensive cultivation of the Shairizor Plains, and the slow rise of Shimeh and Kyudea along the River Jeshimal, the balance of power slowly shifted. For centuries the Middle-Lands found themselves the battleground between Shigek and her southern competitors, Eumarna across the Betmulla Mountains and ancient or Vapartic Nilnamesh. In 1322, Anzumarapata II, the Nilnameshi King of Invishi, crushed the Shigeki and, in an effort to secure his conquests, transplanted hundreds of thousands of indigent Nilnameshi on the Plains of Heshor, an act that would long outlive his brief empire (the Shigeki reconquered the Middle-Lands in 1349). With the collapse of Shigeki regional dominance in 1591, the Jarti attempted to reassert their ancestral control—with disastrous consequences. The resulting war gave rise to a brief Amoti Empire, which reached the length of the Betmulla to the frontier of the Carathay Desert. All the Middle-Lands would fall under the power of Kyraneas in 1703. With the dissolution of Kyraneas, c. 2158, Amoteu enjoyed its second—and last—period of independence, though now the Xerashi, the descendants of Anzumarapata’s settlers, had become its primary competitors. This second “golden age” would witness Inri Sejenus, and the slow growth of the faith that would eventually come to dominate the Three Seas. After a brief period of Xerashi occupation, Amoteu would suffer a long succession of foreign overlords, each leaving its own stamp: first the Ceneians, who conquered the Middle-Lands in 2414, then the Nansur in 3574, and finally the Kianene in 3845. Despite the peace and prosperity enjoyed by other conquered provinces, the early years of Ceneian rule would prove particularly bloody for Amoteu. In 2458, while Triamis the Great was still in his infancy, Inrithi fanatics led the province in a vicious rebellion against Cenei. As punishment, Emperor Siaxas II butchered the inhabitants of Kyudea and razed the city to the ground.
Amoti::The language of Amoteu, a derivative of Mamati.
Anagkë::The Goddess of fortune. Also known as “the Whore of Fate.” Anagkë is one of the primary “Compensatory Gods,” which is to say, one who rewards devotion in life with paradise in the afterlife. Her Cult is extremely popular in the Three Seas, especially among the higher, political castes.
Anagogis::A branch of sorcery that turns on the resonance between meanings and concrete things.
Analogies::An alternate name for Anagogic sorceries.
Anasûrimbor Dynasty, Anasûrimbor::The ruling dynasty of Kûniüri from 1408 to 2147. See Apocalypse.
Anaxophus V::(2109-56)—The Kyranean High King who wielded the Heron Spear against the No-God at Mengedda in 2155.
ancestor scroll::A scroll kept by most pious Inrithi, bearing the names of all the dead ancestors who might intercede on their behalf. Since the Inrithi believe that honour and glory in life brings power in the afterlife, they are particularly proud of renowned ancestors and ashamed of known sinners.
Ancient North::The name given to the Norsirai civilization destroyed in the Apocalypse.
Ancilline Gate::One of the so-called Lesser Gates of Momemn, located to the immediate south of the Girgallic Gate.
Andiamine Heights::The primary residence and principal administrative seat of Nansur Emperors, located on the seaward walls of Momemn.
Anfirig, Thagawain::(4057- )—The Galeoth Earl of Gesindal.
Angeshraël::(?-?)—The most famed Old Prophet of the Tusk, responsible for leading the Five Tribes of Men into Eärwa. Also known as the Burnt Prophet for bowing his face into his fire after confronting Husyelt at the foot of Mount Eshki. His wife was Esmenet.
Angka::The ancient Norsirai name for Zeüm. animas::The “moving force” of all existence, typically analogized as the “breath of God.” Much ink has been spilt over the question of the relation between animas, which is primarily a theological concept, and the sorcerous concept of “onta.” Most scholars are of the opinion that the latter is simply a secular version of the former.
Anissi::(c. 4089- )—The favourite wife of Cnaiür urs Skiötha.
Ankaryotis::A demon of the Outside, one of the more manageable Potents controlled by the Scarlet Spires.
Ankharlus::A famed Kûniüric commentator and high priest of Gilgaöl.
Ankirioth::A province of south central Conriya.
Ankmuri::The lost language of ancient Angka.
Ankulakai::The mountain on the southern limit of the Demua that cradles the city of Atrithau.
Anmergal, Skinede::(4078-4112)—A Tydonni thane, slain at the Battle of Tertae Fields.
Annals of Cenei::—The classic treatise of Casidas, covering the history of Cenei and the Ceneian Empire from the Imperial City’s legendary foundation in 809 to the time of Casidas’s death in 3142.
Annand::A province of north central Conriya, known primarily for its silver and iron mines. “All the silver in Annand” is a common Three Seas expression, meaning “pricelessness.”
Anochirwa::“Horns Reaching” (Kûniüric) An early mannish name for Golgotterath.
Anphairas, Ikurei Anphairas::See Ikurei Anphairas I.
Anplei::The second-largest city in Conriya after Aöknyssus.
anpoi::A traditional drink throughout the Three Seas, made of fermented peach nectar.
Ansacer ab Salajka::(4072- )—The Sapatishah-Governor of Gedea. The Black Gazelle is his totem.
Ansansius, Teres::(c. 2300-2351)—The most famed theologian of the early Thousand Temples, whose The City of Men, The Limping Pilgrim, and Five Letters to All are revered by Shrial scholars.
Anserca::The southernmost province of the Nansur Empire.
Antanamera::A province of High Ainon, located on the highland frontier of Jekk.
Anwurat::A large Kianene fortress to the south of the Sempis Delta, constructed in 3905.
Anyasiri::“Tongueless Howlers” (Ihrimsû) An early Cûnuroi name for the Sranc.
Aöknyssus::The administrative and commercial capital of Conriya. Once the capital of the long-lost Shiradi Empire, Aöknyssus is perhaps the most ancient of the Three Seas’ great cities, with the possible exception of Sumna or Iothiah.
Aörsi::A lost nation of the Ancient North. Aörsi was founded in the 1556 partitioning of Greater Kûniüri between the sons of Anasûrimbor Nanor-Ukkerja I at his death. Even contemporaries recognized Aörsi as the most warlike of the ancient Norsirai nations, though her ambitions remained uniquely defensive rather than expansionist. Sparsely populated save for the regions surrounding her capital, Shiarau, Aörsi faced considerable and unrelenting pressure from the Sranc and Bashrag tribes of the Yimaleti Mountains to the north, not to mention the Consult legions of Golgotterath across the River Sursa to the west—a challenge that would spur the construction of Dagliash, the greatest fortress of the age. It is no accident that the word sursa came to mean “front line” across the Ancient North. Aörsi’s history is one of ingenuity and determination in the face of never-ending crises. Perhaps it is fitting that her destruction in 2136 (see Apocalypse) was due more to the betrayal of her southern Kûniüric cousins than to any real failure on the part of Anasûrimbor Nimeric, her final King.
Apocalypse::The protracted wars and atrocities that obliterated the Ancient North. The roots of the Apocalypse are many and deep. Mandate scholars (who, popular opinion to the contrary, are not the recognized authorities on the subject) argue that they are older than recorded history. More sober accounts reach back no further than the so-called Nonman Tutelage, which eventually led the Gnostic School of Mangaecca to the site of the Incû-Holoinas, the Ark-of-the-Skies, where it lay protected, hidden by Nonmen glamours in the shadow of the western Yimaleti Mountains. Accounts are incomplete, but it seems clear that what were called the Great Sranc Wars were a consequence of the Mangaecca occupation of what would come to be called Golgotterath. Traditionally, scholars date the beginning of the Apocalypse with Anasûrimbor Celmomas’s call for a holy war against Golgotterath, his Great Ordeal, which is to say, with the beginning of the accounts found in The Sagas, the primary historical source text for this cataclysmic event. Legend has it that Nonmen Siqu informed the Grandmaster of the Sohonc (the pre-eminent Sauglish School) that the Mangaecca, or Consult as they had come to be called, had uncovered lost Inchoroi secrets that would lead to the world’s destruction. Seswatha in turn convinced Celmomas to declare war on Golgotterath in 2123. There has been much debate regarding the next twenty years, and much severe criticism of the pride and bickering that would eventually destroy the Ordeal. What most fail to realize is that the threat facing the High Norsirai of Kûniüri and Aörsi at this time was entirely hypothetical. In fact, it is surprising that Celmomas was able to hold his coalition, which included Nonmen as well as token contingents of Kyraneans, together for as long as he did. The first great battle, fought in 2124 on the Plains of Agongorea, was indecisive. Celmomas and his allies wintered in Dagliash and forded the River Sursa the following spring, catching their foe unawares. The Consult withdrew to Golgotterath, and so began what would be called the Great Investiture. For six years the Ordeal attempted to starve the Consult into submission, to no avail. Every assault proved disastrous. Then, in 2131, after a dispute with King Nimeric of Aörsi, Celmomas himself abandoned his own Holy War. The following year disaster struck. Consult legions, apparently utilizing a vast subterranean network of tunnels, appeared in the Ring Mountains to the rear of the Ordeal. The coalition host was all but destroyed. Embittered by the loss of his sons, Nil’giccas, the Nonman King of Ishterebinth, withdrew altogether, leaving the Aörsi to war alone. The following years witnessed a string of further disasters. In 2133 the Aörsi were defeated at the Passes of Amnerlot, and Dagliash was lost soon after. King Nimeric withdrew to his capital of Shiarau. A year passed before Celmomas acknowledged his folly and mobilized to relieve him. By then it was too late. In 2135, Nimeric was mortally wounded in the Battle of Hamuir, and Shiarau fell to the Consult legions the following spring. The Aörsic House of Anasûrimbor had perished forever. Now it was Kûniüri that stood alone. His credibility destroyed, Celmomas was unable to rally any allies, and for a time the situation seemed bleak. But in 2137 his youngest son, Nau-Cayûti, managed to rout the Consult at the Battle of Ossirish, where he earned the name Murswagga, or “Dragonslayer,” for killing Tanhafut the Red. His next victory, within sight of Shiarau’s ruins, was more complete still. The Consult’s remaining Sranc and Bashrag fled across the River Sursa. In 2139 the young Prince besieged and recaptured Dagliash, then launched several spectacular raids across the Plains of Agongorea. Then, in 2140, Nau-Cayûti’s beloved concubine, Aulisi, was abducted by Sranc marauders and taken to Golgotterath. According to The Sagas, Seswatha was able to convince the Prince (who was once his student) that she could be rescued from the Incû-Holoinas, and the two of them embarked on an expedition that is almost certainly apocryphal. Mandate commentators dispute the account found in The Sagas, where they successfully return with both Aulisi and the Heron Spear, claiming that Aulisi was never found. Whatever happened, at least two things are certain: the Heron Spear was in fact recovered, and Nau-Cayûti died shortly after (apparently poisoned by his first wife, Iëva). In 2141, the Consult returned to the offensive, wrongly thinking the Kûniüri crippled by the loss of their greatest and most beloved son. But Nau-Cayûti’s mead-brothers proved themselves able, even brilliant, commanders. At the Battle of Skothera, the Sranc hordes were crushed by General En-Kaujalau, though he died of mysterious causes within weeks of this victory (according to The Sagas, he was another victim of Iëva and her poisons, but again this is disputed by Mandate scholars). In 2142, General Sag-Marmau inflicted yet another crushing defeat on Aurang and his Consult legions, and by the fall of that year he had hounded the remnant of their horde to the Gates of Golgotterath itself. But the Second Great Investiture proved far shorter than the first. As Seswatha had feared, the Consult had been merely playing for time, nothing more. In the spring of 2143 the No-God, summoned by means unknown, first drew breath. Across the world, Sranc, Bashrag, and Wracu—all the obscene progeny of the Inchoroi—hearkened to his call. Sag-Marmau and the greater glory of Kûniüri were annihilated. The effect of his coming cannot be overestimated. As numerous independent accounts attest, all Men could sense his dread presence on the horizon, and all infants were born dead. Anasûrimbor Celmomas II had little difficulty gathering support for his Second Ordeal. Nil’giccas and Celmomas were reconciled. Across Eärwa, hosts of Men began marching toward Kûniüri. But it was too late. Celmomas and his Second Ordeal were destroyed on the Fields of Eleneöt in 2146. The Heron Spear, which could not be used because the No-God refused to give battle, was lost. Kûniüri and all the great and ancient cities of the River Aumris were destroyed the following year. The Nonmen of Injor-Niyas retreated to Ishterebinth. Eämnor was laid waste the year after, though its capital, Atrithau, raised on anarcane ground, managed to survive. The list continues. Akksersia and Harmant in 2149. The Meöri Empire in 2150. Inweära in 2151, though the city of Sakarpus was spared. The Shiradi Empire in 2153. The Battle of Kathol Pass, fought primarily by the remnants of the Meöri and the Nonmen of Cil-Aujas in the autumn of 2151, would be mankind’s only victory during these dark years, one which was entirely undone when the Meöri turned on their benefactors and sacked the ancient Nonman Mansion the following spring (which gave birth to the myth that the Galeoth, the descendants of those Meöri refugees, were forever cursed with treachery and fractiousness). Though defeated at the Battle of Mehsarunath in 2154, Anaxophus V, the High King of Kyraneas, managed to save the core of his host and fled southward, abandoning Mehtsonc and Sumna to the Scylvendi. The Tusk was evacuated and brought to ancient Invishi in Nilnamesh. Though the historical record is scant, Mandate scholars insist that it was at this time that the High King admitted to Seswatha that his knights had rescued the Heron Spear from the Fields of Eleneöt eight years previously. Perhaps no single event from these dark times has inspired more acrimony and debate among Three Seas scholars of the Apocalypse. Some historians, the great Casidas among them, have called this the most monstrous deception in history. How could Anaxophus conceal the only weapon that could defeat the No-God while the greater part of the world died? But others, including many belonging to the Mandate, argue precisely the opposite. They admit that Anaxophus’s motive—to save Kyraneas and Kyraneas alone —was more than a little suspect. But they point to the fact that had he not hidden the Heron Spear, it would surely have been lost in the catastrophes following the Fields of Eleneöt and the destruction of the Second Ordeal. According to extant accounts, not once did the No-God expose himself to battle during this time. It was the years of attrition that forced him to intercede in the Battle of Mengedda. Whatever the case, the No-God, or Tsuramah as the Kyraneans called him, was destroyed by Anaxophus V in 2155. Freed of his terrible will, his Sranc, Bashrag, and Wracu slaves dispersed. The Apocalypse had ended, and Men set out to recover what they could of a ruined world.
apples::Galeoth slang for severed heads gathered as trophies.
Araxes Mountains, Araxes::A range forming the eastern frontiers of both Ce Tydonn and Conriya.
Architect::An epithet used by skin-spies to describe their Consult makers.
Arithmeas::The Prime Augur to Ikurei Xerius III.
Ark-of-the-Skies::See Incû-Holoinas.
Arweal::(4077-4111)—One of the Nascenti, formerly a client thane of Earl Werijen, claimed by disease at Caraskand.
Ascension::The direct passage of Inri Sejenus to the Outside as described in “The Book of Days” in The Tractate. According to Inrithi tradition, Sejenus ascended from the Juterum, or the Sacred Heights, in Shimeh, though The Tractate seems to suggest that Kyudea and not Shimeh was the location. The First Temple was purportedly raised on the very location.
Asgilioch::“The Gate of Asga” (Kyranean from Kemkaric geloch) The great Nansur fortress, dating back to Far Antiquity, guarding the so-called Southron Gates in the Unaras Spur. Perhaps no Three Seas fortress can claim such a storied past (which includes, most recently, stopping no fewer than three Fanim invasions). Over the years the Nansur have coined many epithets for the famed stronghold, among them Hubara, or “the Breakers.”
Aspect-Emperor::The title taken by Triamis the Great in the twenty-third year of his rule (when the Shriah, Ekyannus III, formally institutionalized the so-called Emperor Cult) and adopted by all his successors.
Athjeäri, Coithus, Coithus Athjeäri::(4089- )—The Earl of the Galeoth region of Gaenri, and nephew to Coithus Saubon.
Atkondo-Atyoi::The language group of the Satyothi pastoralists of the Atkondras Mountains and surrounding regions.
Atkondras Mountains, Atkondras::Perhaps the greatest range west of the Kayarsus, running from the Sea of Jorua to the Great Ocean, and effectively sealing Zeüm from the rest of Eärwa.
Atrithau::The ancient administrative and commercial capital of what was once Eämnor, and one of two Norsirai cities to have survived the Apocalypse. Atrithau is peculiar in that it is built upon what is called “anarcane ground,” which is to say, ground that renders sorcery impotent, found at the foot of Mount Ankulakai. It was originally founded c. 570 as the fortress Ara-Etrith (“New Etrith”) by the famed Umeri God-King Carû-Ongonean.
Atrithi::The language of Atrithau, derived from Eämnoric.
Atsushan Highlands, Atsushan::The arid hill country of the Gedean interior.
Attong Plateau, Attong::“Missing Tower” (from Kyranean att anoch) Also known as the Attong Gap. The famous opening in the Hethanta Mountains, and the traditional invasion route of the Scylvendi.
Attrempus::“Tower of Respite” (Kyranean) The sister fortress of Atyersus, founded in 2158 by Seswatha and the nascent School of Mandate, and held in trust by House Nersei of Conriya since 3921.
Atyersus::“Tower of Warning” (Kyranean) The sister fortress of Attrempus, founded in 2157 by Seswatha and other Gnostic survivors of the Apocalypse. Atyersus is the primary stronghold of the Mandate.
Auja-Gilcûnni::The lost “ground tongue” of the Nonmen. See Languages of Nonmen.
Aujic::The lost tongue of the Nonmen Aujan Mansions.
Aumri-Saugla::The language group of the ancient Norsirai peoples of the Aumris Valley.
Aumris River, Aumris::The primary river system of northwest Eärwa, draining the greater Istyuli basin and emptying into the Neleöst Sea. The River Aumris is also the cradle of Norsirai civilization. Over a relatively brief period of time, the High Norsirai tribes that settled the rich alluvial plains along the lower Aumris founded the first cities of Men, including Trysë, Sauglish, Etrith, and Ûmerau. As the result of trade with the Nonmen of Injor-Niyas, the power and sophistication of the Aumris River civilization grew quickly, culminating in the Trysean Empire under the God-King Cûnwerishau in the fourth century.
Aurang::(?- )—A surviving Prince of the Inchoroi and Horde-General to the No-God during the Apocalypse. Very little is known of Aurang, save that he is a ranking member of the Consult and the twin brother of Aurax.
Aurax::(?- )—A surviving Prince of the Inchoroi. Very little is known of Aurax, save that he is a ranking member of the Consult and the twin brother of Aurang. Mandate scholars speculate that it was he who first taught the Tekne to the Mangaecca.
Auvangshei::Famed Ceneian fortress on the extreme western frontier of Nilnamesh, often symbolically invoked as the limit of the known world, which is to say, the Three Seas.
Avowels::The classic text by Olekaros, which poses as a “spiritual exploration” but is in actual fact little more than a collection of wise sayings from various thinkers in various nations. Its Sheyic translation enjoys widespread popularity among caste-noble lay readers in the Three Seas
bagaratta::The “sweeping way” of Scylvendi sword fighting.
Bajeda, Straits of Bajeda::The straits separating the southwestern tip of Nron from the southeastern extremities of Cironj.
Balait urs Kututha, Balait, Kututha::(4072-4110)—A Scylvendi warrior of the Utemot tribe, and Cnaiür urs Skiötha’s brother-in-law.
Bannut urs Hannut, Bannut, Hannut::(4059-4110)—A Scylvendi warrior of the Utemot tribe, and Cnaiür urs Skiötha’s uncle.
Bardic Priest::In the traditional folk religions of the Ancient North, a type of wandering priest who earned his living reciting scriptural lays and performing priestly functions for various gods.
Barisullas, Nrezza, Nrezza Barisullas::(4053- ) The King of Cironj, at once admired and maligned throughout the Three Seas for his mercantile ingenuity. He is notorious for surviving and managing to reverse Shrial Censure not once but three times.
Batathent::A ruined fortress-temple dating back to pre-classical Kyraneas, and destroyed by the Scylvendi shortly after the fall of Cenei in 3351.
Battle-Celebrant::An honour bestowed by the Gilgallic Priesthood on those most responsible for victory in battle.
Battlemaster::Among the Inrithi, the traditional rank assigned to those commanding coalitions.
Battle of Anwurat::A pivotal battle of the First Holy War, fought in the summer of 4111 about the fortress of Anwurat south of the Sempis Delta. Despite early setbacks, the Inrithi under Cnaiür urs Skiötha managed to rout the Kianene host of Skauras ab Nalajan, allowing the subsequent conquest of southern Shigek and opening the road to Caraskand.
Battle of Caraskand::Sometimes called the Battle of Tertae Fields. The desperate and pivotal battle in 4112 between the host of Kascamandri ab Tepherokar, the Padirajah of Kian, and the First Holy War under Anasûrimbor Kellhus, where the Fanim, despite outnumbering the diseased and starved Inrithi, found themselves incapable of slowing or stopping the First Holy War’s general advance. Many attribute the Inrithi victory to the intercession of the God, though a more likely explanation is to be found in the revelatory events immediately preceding the battle. Nersei Proyas is particularly effective in his descriptions of the maniacal morale enjoyed by the Inrithi as a result of the Warrior-Prophet’s Circumfixion and subsequent vindication. That the Kianene were overconfident is amply demonstrated by the Padirajah’s decision to allow the First Holy War to assemble its ranks unmolested.
Battle of Eleneöt Fields::The great battle between the Horde of the No-God and the Second Ordeal on Kûniüri’s northeastern frontier in 2146. Despite having assembled the greatest host of their age, Anasûrimbor Celmomas and his allies were unprepared for the vast numbers of Sranc, Bashrag, and Wracu gathered by the No-God and his Consult slaves. The battle was an unmitigated catastrophe, and signalled the eventual destruction of Norsirai civilization.
Battle of Kiyuth::An important battle between the Imperial Army of Nansur and the Scylvendi, fought in 4110 on the banks of the River Kiyuth, a tributary of the Sempis river system. The overconfident Scylvendi King-of-Tribes led his people into a trap laid by Ikurei Conphas, the Nansur Exalt-General. The resulting defeat was unprecedented, given that it occurred on the Jiünati Steppe.
Battle of Maän::A minor battle fought between Conriya and Ce Tydonn in 4092.
Battle of Mehsarunath::The first great battle fought between the gathered might of Kyraneas and the host of the No-God on the Attong Plateau in 2154. Though Aurang, the No-God’s Horde-General, won the battle, the Kyranean High King, Anaxophus V, was able to escape with much of his host intact, setting the stage for the far more decisive Battle of Mengedda the following year.
Battle of Mengedda::the Second—The desperate battle where Anaxophus V and his southern tributaries and allies made their victorious stand against the Horde of the No-God in 2155. Thought by many to be the most important battle in history. Battle of Mengedda, the Fourth—The battle where the so-called Vulgar Holy War under Nersei Calmemunis suffered utter destruction at the hands of the Kianene under Skauras ab Nalajan in 4110. Battle of Mengedda, the Fifth—The first decisive battle fought between the First Holy War and the Kianene, in 4111. Plagued with organizational problems and dissension among its commanders, the First Holy War, under the nominal command of Prince Coithus Saubon, was caught by Skauras ab Nalajan and his Kianene host on the Plains of Mengedda with only half of its available strength. From morning to late afternoon, the Inrithi managed to beat back innumerable Kianene charges. When the remainder of the First Holy War arrived on the Fanim flank, the will of the Kianene broke and they were routed.
Battle of Paremti::A minor battle fought between Conriya and Ce Tydonn in 4109, and the first military victory of Prince Nersei Proyas. Historically significant because Proyas had his cousin, Calmemunis, whipped for impiety, an act that many historians claim precipitated Calmemunis’s decision to prematurely march with the so-called Vulgar Holy War.
Battle of the Slops::Name given to the prolonged contest between the Kianene and the Ainoni at the Battle of Anwurat.
Battle of Trantis Bay::The decisive sea battle where the Kianene fleet, using Cishaurim, was able to annihilate the Imperial Nansur fleet under General Sassotian in 4111, thereby denying the First Holy War its primary source of water for its march across Khemema.
Battle of Tywanrae Fords::One of three disastrous defeats suffered by Akksersia and its allies at the hands of the Horde of the NoGod. Tywanrae is often evoked by Mandate scholars as an example of the limitations of using Chorae alone to cope with enemy sorcerers in battle.
Battle of Zirkirta::A major battle fought between the Kianene host of Hasjinnet ab Skauras and the Scylvendi under Yursut urs Muknai on the Jiünati Steppe in 4103. Though their cavalry proved no match for the Scylvendi, and Hasjinnet himself was slain, the Kianene were quick in recovering, and most of the ill-fated expedition survived.
Battleplain::See Mengedda Plains.
Battles of Agongorea::See Apocalypse.
Bengulla::(4103-12)—Son of Aëngelas and Valrissa.
benjuka::A subtle and ancient game of strategy played by caste-nobility throughout the Three Seas. A derivative of the more esoteric mirqu played by Nonmen, the first extant references to benjuka date back to the so-called Nonmen Tutelage (555-825).
Betmulla Mountains, Betmulla::A minor mountain range forming the southwestern frontier of both Xerash and Amoteu.
Biaxi, House Biaxi::One of the Houses of the Congregate, and traditional rival to House Ikurei.
blood-of-the-onta::A common term for what Zarathinius called the “ink” of the Mark.
Bogras, Praxum Bogras::(4059-4111)—The general of the Selial Column, slain at Anwurat.
Bokae::An old Ceneian fort on the western frontier of Enathpaneah.
Boksarias, Pirras Boksarias::(2395-2437)—The Ceneian Emperor who standardized trading protocols within the empire and established a thriving system of markets in its major cities. Book of Circles and Spirals, The—The magnum opus of Sorainas, providing an entertaining blend of philosophical commentary and religious aphorism.
Book of Devices::An oft-revised Nansur military manual depicting the banner devices of their ancestral foes.
Book of Divine Acts::—The magnum opus of Memgowa, the famed Zeümi sage and philosopher. Though not as commonly read or
copied as hisCelestial Aphorisms, most scholars consider it a vastly superior work.
Bowl, the Bowl::The name given to Caraskand’s central quarter, which is surrounded by five of the city’s nine heights.
Breaking of the Gates::The name given to the assault on the Gates of Eärwa, a series of fortified passes through the Great Kayarsus, by the Men of Eänna. Since The Chronicle of the Tusk ends with the determination to invade Eärwa, or the Land of the “Uplifted Sun,” and since the Nonmen Mansions most involved in resisting the Tribes of Men were all destroyed, very little is known either of the Breaking of the Gates or of the subsequent migratory invasions.
Bukris::The God of famine. As one of the so-called Punitive Gods, who command sacrifices through threat and the imposition of suffering, Bukris has no real Cult or priesthood. According to Kiünnat tradition, Bukris is the older brother of Anagkë, which is why Anagkean Cultic Priests typically administer the rites of propitiation during times of hunger. Burning of the White Ships—One of the more famous acts of treachery during the Apocalypse. Falling back before the Consult legions, Anasûrimbor Nimeric dispatched the Aörsic fleet in 2134 to shelter in the Kûniüri port of Aesorea, where it was burned by agents unknown mere days after its arrival, deepening the feud between the two peoples, with tragic consequences. See Apocalypse.
Burulan::(4084- )—One of Esmenet’s Kianene body-slaves.
Byantas::A near antique writer of the Ceneian Empire.
Calasthenes::(4055-4111)—A sorcerer of rank in the Scarlet Spires, slain by a Chorae at Anwurat.
Calmemunis, Nersei Calmemunis::(4069-4110)—The Palatine of the Conriyan province of Kanampurea, and nominal leader of the Vulgar Holy War.
Cants::The name given to offensive sorcerous incantations. See sorcery.
Cants of Calling::The family of incantations that enable communications over distance. Though the metaphysics of these Cants is only loosely understood, all long-distance Cants of Calling seem to turn on the so-called Here Hypothesis. One can call only to slumbering souls (because they remain open to the Outside) and only to those residing someplace where the Caller has physically been. The idea is that the “Here” of the Caller can only reach a “There,” or other location, that has been a “Here” sometime in the past. The degree of similarity between Anagogic and Gnostic Cants of Calling has led many to suspect that they hold the key to unravelling the Gnosis.
Cants of Compulsion::The family of incantations that control the movements of an individual’s soul. Typically these include the socalled Cants of Torment, though not always. An insidious aspect of these Cants is that their subject often has no way of distinguishing sorcerously compelled thoughts from his own thoughts. This has spawned a whole literature on the very notion of “will.” If the compelled soul feels every bit as uncompelled as the free soul, then how can anyone truly know himself to be free?
Canute::A Province of Ce Tydonn, one of the so-called Deep Marches of the Upper Swa.
Caphrianus I::(3722-85)—Commonly called “the Younger” to distinguish him from his Ceneian namesake. The Nansur Surmante emperor famed for his wily diplomacy and far-reaching reforms of the Nansur legal code.
Cara-Sincurimoi::“Angel of Endless Hunger” (Ihrimsû) An ancient Nonman name for the No-God. See No-God.
Caraskand::A major city and great caravan entrepot of the southwestern Three Seas. The administrative and commercial capital of Enathpaneah.
Carathay Desert, Carathay::Vast arid region of dunes and gravel flats occupying southwestern Eärwa. Large oases are primarily found along the
eastern regions of the desert, but there are skeletal river systems throughout.
Caro-Shemic::The language of the scriptural pastoralists of the Carathay Desert.
Carythusal::Also known as “the City of Flies.” The most populous city in the Three Seas, and the administrative and commercial capital of High Ainon.
Casidas::(3081-3142)—A famed philosopher and historian of Near Antiquity, best known for his magisterial The Annals of Cenei.
caste-apparati, apparati::A term for hereditary officials in Three Seas bureaucracies.
caste-menial, menial::A term for the suthenti, or the hereditary labourer caste.
caste-noble, noble::A term for the kjineta, or the hereditary warrior caste.
caste-priest, priest::A term for the nahat, or the hereditary priest caste.
castes::Inherited social statuses. Though weaker in the so-called Middle-North, the Inrithi caste system is one of the central institutions of Three Seas society. In a technical sense, there are almost as many castes as there are occupations, but in practice they fall into roughly four different groups: the suthenti or labouring castes, the momurai or transactional castes, the nahat or priestly castes, and the kjineta or warrior castes. Elaborate protocols supposedly govern all interactions within and between castes to ensure the observances of various privileges and obligations, as well as to minimize ritual pollution, but in practical terms they are rarely adhered to unless in the pursuit of advantage.
caünnu::The Scylvendi name for the hot southwestern winds that cross the Jiünati Steppe during the height of summer.
Celestial Aphorisms::One of Memgowa’s most celebrated texts.
Celmomas II, Anasûrimbor Celmomas II::(2089-2146)—The implacable foe of Golgotterath in the early days of the Apocalypse, and last of the Kûniüric High Kings. SeeApocalypse.
Celmomian Prophecy::The dying words of Anasûrimbor Celmomas II to Seswatha on the Fields of Eleneöt in 2146 to the effect that an Anasûrimbor would return at “the end of the world.” Given that the prevention of the so-called Second Apocalypse is the Mandate’s entire reason for existence, it is perhaps no surprise that most Mandate scholars think the Celmomian Prophecy authentic. Few others in the Three Seas credit their claims, however.
Cememketri::(4046- )—The Grandmaster of the Imperial Saik.
Cenei::A city of the Kyranae Plain that arose from the Age of Warring Cities to conquer the entire Three Seas. Cenei was destroyed by the Scylvendi under Horiötha in 3351.
Ceneian Empire, Ceneian::The greatest Ketyai empire in history, embracing the entirety of the Three Seas at its greatest extent, from the Atkondras Mountains in the southwest, to Lake Huösi in the north, to the Kayarsus Mountains in the southeast. The primary agent in the creation and maintenance of this empire was the Ceneian Imperial Army, which was perhaps the best trained and organized in history. No more than a minor river trading town in the days of Kyraneas, Cenei emerged from the Age of Warring Cities as the pre-eminent city of the Kyranae Plain. The conquest of Gielgath in 2349 sealed the city’s regional dominance, and in the ensuing decades the Ceneians under Xercallas II would secure the remnants of what had once been Kyraneas. Xercallas’s successors continued his aggressive, expansionist policies, first pacifying the Norsirai tribes of Cepalor, then waging three consecutive wars against Shigek, which fell in 2397. Then, in 2414, after conquering Enathpaneah, Xerash, and Amoteu, General Naxentas staged a successful coup and declared himself Emperor of Cenei. Though he would be assassinated the following year, all his successors would avail themselves of the Imperial institutions he created. Triamis I became Emperor in 2478, beginning what most scholars consider the Ceneian Golden Age. In 2483 he conquered Nilnamesh, and then Cingulat the following year. In 2485 he defeated a great Zeümi host at Amarah, and would have invaded the Satyothi nation had not mutinies among his homesick troops prevented him. He spent the next decade consolidating his gains, and striving against the internecine religious violence between followers of the traditional Kiünnat sects and the growing numbers of “Inrithi.” It was in the course of negotiating settlements that he became friends with the then Shriah of the Thousand Temples, Ekyannus III, and in 2505 he himself converted to Inrithism, declaring it the official state religion of the Ceneian Empire. He spent the next ten years putting down religious rebellions, while at the same time invading and occupying both Cironj (2508) and Nron (2511). He then spent ten years campaigning across the eastern Three Seas against the successor nations of the old Shiradi Empire, first conquering Ainon (2518), then Cengemis (2519), and finally Annand (2525).   Ensuing Aspect-Emperors would marginally add to the extent of the empire, but its boundaries remained fairly stable for nearly eight hundred years, during which time the language and institutions of Imperial Cenei and the Thousand Temples would be stitched into the very fabric of Three Seas society. Aside from periodic wars with Zeüm, and the interminable wars against the Scylvendi and Norsirai tribes across the empire’s northern frontier, this would be an age of unprecedented peace, prosperity, and commerce. Only the periodic civil wars, usually fought over succession, posed any real threat to the empire.  Though Cenei itself was destroyed by the Scylvendi under Horiötha in 3351, historians traditionally date the collapse of the Ceniean Empire in 3372, when General Maurelta surrendered to Sarothesser I in Ainon.

Cengemic::The language of Cengemis, a derivative of Sheyo-Kheremic.
Cengemis::The province that once marked the northern limit of the Eastern Ceneian Empire. After the collapse of the Eastern Empire in 3372, it enjoyed independence until overrun by Tydonni tribes in 3742.
Cepalor::A region of temperate, semi-forested plains extending east of the Hethantas from the Nansur frontier to the southwestern marches of Galeoth. Since the fall of Kyraneas, Cepalor has been inhabited by Norsirai pastoralists known as the Cepalorae, who have long been tributaries of the Nansurium.
Cepaloran::The language group of Norsirai pastoralists of the Cepaloran Plains.
Cerish Sea, Cerish::The largest of Eärwa’s inland seas.
Cerjulla, Sheorog Cerjulla::(4069-4111)—The Tydonni Earl of Warnute, claimed by disease at Caraskand.
Cern Auglai::A fortress and pirate entrepot located on the coast of Thunyerus.
Cet’ingira::(?- )—See Mekeritrig.
Ce Tydonn::A Norsirai nation of the Three Seas, located north of Conriya on the eastern shoreline of the Meneanor, founded in 3742 in the wake of Cengemis’s collapse. The first mention of the Tydonni is found in Casidas’s Annals of Cenei, where he mentions their raids across the River Swa. Descendants of White Norsirai refugees from the Apocalypse, the Tydonni are thought to have occupied the southern regions of the Dameori Wilderness for centuries, prevented by their native fractiousness from causing much difficulty for their southern Ketyai neighbours. At some point in the thirty-eighth century, however, they united, and with little difficulty overwhelmed the Men of Cengemis at the Battle of Marswa in 3722. It wasn’t until King Haul-Namyelk finally succeeded in unifying the various tribes under his absolute authority in 3741 that Ce Tydonn proper came into existence. Perhaps the most peculiar and distinctive predilection of the Tydonni is found in their racial beliefs. Ti dunn literally means “struck iron” in their tongue, reflecting their belief that their people have been purified by the crucible of their long wandering through the Dameori wildernesses. They hold that this gives them “privileged blood,” rendering them morally, intellectually, and physically superior to other races. This has made the Tydonni cruel overlords of the Cengemi, who have often rebelled against them.
chav::An addictive narcotic popular among the Ainoni aristocracy, although many eschew it because of its uncertain origins. Chanv reputedly sharpens the intellect, extends one’s lifespan, and drains the body of all its pigment. Charamemas (4036-4108)—The famed Shrial commentator and author of The Ten Holies. Achamian’s replacement as Proyas’s tutor in exoterics in 4093.
Charcharius, Trimus Charcharius::(4052- )—The Patridomos of the House Trimus.
Chargiddo::A large fortress located on the frontier of Xerash and Amoteu beneath the Betmulla Mountains.
Chemerat::An ancient Kyranean name for Shigek, meaning “Red Land.”
Chepheramunni::(4068-4111)—The King-Regent of High Ainon, nominal leader of the Ainoni during much of the First Holy War, claimed by disease at Caraskand.
Chiama::Walled town on the River Sempis, destroyed by the First Holy War in 4111.
Chianadyni::A governorate of Kian and one-time tributary of the Nansur Empire. Located to the west of Eumarna and east of Nilnamesh, Chianadyni is the traditional homeland of the Kianene and, after Eumarna, the wealthiest and most populous governorate in Kian.
Chigra::“Slaying Light” (Aghurzoi) An ancient Sranc name for Seswatha.
Children of Eänna::An epithet for Men in The Chronicle of the Tusk.
Chinjosa, Musammu Chinjosa::(4078- )—The Count-Palatine of the Ainoni province of Antanamera, appointed King-Regent of High Ainon shortly after Chepheramunni’s death in the winter of 4111.
Chorae::Artifacts of the Ancient North, also known as “Trinkets” (to the Schools) and “The Tears of God” (to the Inrithi). In appearance, Chorae are small iron spheres, one inch in diameter, that are banded by runes written in Gilcûnya, the holy tongue of the Nonmen Quya. Chorae are extraordinary in that they render their bearer immune to all sorcerous Cants and instantly kill any sorcerer who comes into contact with them. Although the principles behind their creation (they belong to a lost branch of sorcery called the Aporos) are no longer understood, thousands are believed to circulate in the Three Seas alone. The Chorae play a pivotal role in the political balance of power in the Three Seas, insofar as they allow the non-scholastic Great Factions to check the power of the Schools.
Chorae bowmen::Specialized units that use Chorae affixed to the end of arrow shafts or crossbow bolts to kill enemy sorcerers. Chorae archers are a staple of almost every military organization in Eärwa.
Chronicle of the Tusk::—The most ancient extant human text in Eärwa, and the scriptural foundation for all mannish faiths save Fanimry. As the oldest literate work, its provenance is almost entirely unknown. Many Inrithi commentators have pointed out that it must have been a collective work, cobbled together from many (likely oral) sources over a period of many years. Like most scriptures, its popular interpretation is highly selective and idealized. It consists of the following six books:
Book of Canticles::The old “Tusk Laws” regarding every aspect of personal and public life, which were superseded in the Inrithi tradition by the revised strictures of The Tractate.
Book of Gods::The primary scripture of the Cults, enumerating the various gods, and explaining the rites of purification and propitiation basic to each.
Book of Hintarates::The story of Hintarates, an upright man plagued with apparently undeserved adversity.
Book of Songs::A collection of verse prayers and parables extolling the virtues of piety, manliness, courage, and tribal loyalty.
Book of Tribes::The extended narrative of the first Prophets and Chieftain-Kings of the Five Tribes of Men before the invasion of Eärwa.
Book of Warrants::The account of the observances governing the interactions between castes.
Cil-Aujas::A lost Nonman Mansion, located in the shadow of the Osthwai Mountains.
Cincûlic::The undeciphered tongue of the Inchoroi, which the Nonmen call Cincûl’hisa, or “the Gasp of Many Reeds.” According to the Isûphiryas,communication between the Cûnuroi and the Inchoroi was impossible until the latter “birthed mouths” and began speaking Cûnuroi tongues.
Cinganjehoi ab Sakjal, Cinganjehoi::(4076- )—Famed Kianene Saptishah-Governor of Eumarna, known among his people as “the Tiger of Eumarna.”
Cingulat::A Ketyai nation of the Three Seas, located on the northwestern coast of Kutnarmu, just south of Nilnamesh.
Cinguli::The language of Cingulat, a derivative of Sapmatari.
Cironj::A Ketyai island nation located at the juncture of all three of the Three Seas, and possessing a strong mercantile and maritime tradition.
Cironjic::The language of Cironj, a derivative of Sheyo-Kheremic.
Cishaurim::The notorious priest-sorcerers of the Fanim based in Shimeh. According to Fanim religious tradition, the Prophet Fane became the first of the Cishaurim after he went blind in the desert. Given Fane’s claim that the true power of the Solitary God cannot be exercised so long as one sees the profane world, Cishaurim initiates voluntarily blind themselves at a certain point in their study, enabling them to dispense the “divine water” of the “Psûkhe,” as the Cishaurim refer to it. Little is known about the metaphysics of the Psûkhe beyond the fact that it cannot be perceived by the Few and that it is in many ways almost as formidable as the Anagogic practice of the Schools.    The Scarlet Spires categorize individual Cishaurim according to their power: Tertiaries, or those with only the most rudimentary strength, Secondaries, or those with strength comparable to sorcerous initiates, and Primaries, those with strength exceeding that of initiates (but still, according to the Scarlet Magi, short of the strength possessed by true Anagogic sorcerers of rank).
Citadel of the Dog::The great redoubt of Caraskand as named by the Men of the Tusk. Raised by Xatantius in 3684, it was originally called Insarum, until it fell to the Fanim in 3839, who called it Il’huda, “the Bulwark.”
Cleansed Lands::A Kianene epithet for nations where Fanimry is predominant.
Cmiral::The great temple complex of Momemn, located near the heart of the city, adjacent to the Kamposea Agora.
Coithus, House Coithus::The ruling dynasty of Galeoth.
Cojirani ab Houk::(4078-4112)—The Grandee of Mizrai, famed for his enormous strength and size, slain by Prince Nersei Proyas at the Battle of Caraskand.
College of Luthymae::The College of the Thousand Temples responsible for spying and intelligence.
College of Marucee::A College of the Thousand Temples destroyed in the Sack of Shimeh in 3845.
College of Sareöt::A College of the Thousand Temples dedicated to the preservation of knowledge, destroyed in the Fall of Shigek in 3933.
Colleges::Organizations of priests directly subordinate to the Thousand Temples, with mandates ranging from caring for the poor and sick to the collection of intelligence.
to come after::For the Dûnyain, “to come after” means to be victimized by events over which one has no control. See Dûnyain.
to come before::For the Dûnyain, “to come before” means to master the passage of events. See Dûnyain.
Commerce of Souls::Ajencis’s classic treatise on politics.
Condic::The language group of ancient pastoralists of the Near Istyuli Plains.
Conditioned::A term used to refer to the Dûnyain.
Conditioning::Specifically, the arduous physical, emotional, and intellectual training undergone by Dûnyain monks, though the term has more general and far-reaching connotations as well. The Dûnyain believe that everything is conditioned in some way, but they draw a principled distinction between the arbitrary conditioning of the world and the rational conditioning of Men. Conditioning in the light of the Logos, they believe, allows more such conditioning, which in turn leverages more such conditioning, and so on. This virtuous circle, they believe, finds its apotheosis in the Absolute: the Dûnyain believe that, using reason, they can condition themselves to the point of becoming unconditioned, a perfect, self-moving soul. See Dûnyain.
Conphas, Ikurei Conphas::(4084- )—The nephew of Emperor Ikurei Xerius III and heir apparent to the Imperial Mantle.
Conriya::A pre-eminent Ketyai nation of the eastern Three Seas, located south of Ce Tydonn and north of High Ainon, founded in 3374 (after the collapse of the Eastern Ceneian Empire) around Aöknyssus, the ancient capital of Shir. Of the four successor nations to the Shiradi Empire (Cengemis, Conriya, Ainon, and Sansor), none has worked so hard to reclaim and preserve its ancient traditions. Nowhere are the caste divisions more rigidly observed, and nowhere are the codes governing caste-noble behaviour more strict. Though many, particularly the Ainoni, scoff at what they consider the affectation of antique ways, there can be little doubt that the resulting social discipline has served the Conriyans well. Since gaining independence, Conriya has successfully weathered innumerable incursions, invasions, blockades, and embargoes, almost all of them due to the machinations of High Ainon.
Conriyan::The language of Conriya, a derivative of Sheyo-Kheremic.
Consult::The cabal of Magi and Generals that survived the death of Mog in 2155 and has laboured ever since to bring about the return of the No-God.
Coyauri::The famed elite heavy cavalry of the Kianene Padirajah, first organized by Habal ab Sarouk in 3892 as a response to the Nansur Kidruhil. The White Horse on Yellow is their standard.
Csokis::A derelict Inrithi temple complex located in Caraskand.
Cuärweth::A province of interior Ce Tydonn, located to the north of Meigeiri.
Cuäxaji::(4069- )—The Sapatishah-Governor of Khemema.
Cu’jara Cinmoi::(?-?)—The greatest of the Nonman Kings and first great foe of the Inchoroi. See Cûno-Inchoroi Wars.
Cultic Deities::See Hundred Gods.
Cultic Priests::Those priests, usually hereditary, devoted to the service and worship of one of the Hundred Gods.
Cults::The collective name of all the various sects devoted to the individual Gods of the so-called Kiünnat. In the Three Seas, the Cults have been administratively and spiritually subordinate to the Thousand Temples since Triamis I, the first Aspect-Emperor of Cenei, declared Inrithism the official state religion of the Ceneian Empire in 2505.
Cumor, Haarnan (4043-4111)—The High Cultist of Gilgaöl in the Holy War, claimed by disease at Caraskand.
Cûno-Halaroi Wars::The wars between Nonmen and Men following the Breaking of the Gates, of which very few accounts exist. See Breaking of the Gates.
Cûno-Inchoroi Wars::The protracted series of wars between the Nonmen and the Inchoroi following the ancient arrival of the latter. According to the Isûphiryas, the Incû-Holoinas, the “Ark-of-the-Skies,” plunged to earth to the west of the Sea of Neleost in land ruled by Nin’janjin, the Nonman King of Viri. The letter sent by Nin’janjin to Cû’jara-Cinmoi, the King of Siöl, is recorded as follows: The Sky has cracked into potter’s shards, Fire sweeps the compass of Heaven, The beasts flee, their hearts maddened, The trees fall, their backs broken. Ash has shrouded all sun, choked all seed, The Halaroi howl piteously at the Gates, Dread Famine stalks my Mansion. Brother Siöl, Viri begs your pardon. Rather than send aid to Nin’janjin, Cû’jara-Cinmoi assembled an army and invaded the lands of Viri. Nin’janjin and his Ishroi capitulated without battle; Viri became a bloodless tributary of Siöl. The western lands of Viri, however, remained shrouded in cloud and ash. Survivors from the region spoke of a fiery vessel streaking across the skies. So Cû’jara-Cinmoi commanded Ingalira, a hero of Siöl, to lead an expedition to find this Ark. What happened to Ingalira on this expedition is not recorded, but he returned to Siöl some three months later and presented two inhuman captives to Cû’jara-Cinmoi. Ingalira called these captives Inchoroi, or “People of Emptiness,” both because the sounds they made were empty of meaning and because they fell from the emptiness of the sky. He spoke of flattened forests and gouged plains, of mountains thrown into a ring, and of two golden horns rearing from a molten sea, so mighty they brushed the clouds. Repelled by the obscene aspect of the Inchoroi, Cû’jara-Cinmoi had them put to death, and set a Watch upon the Incû-Holoinas, the Ark-of-the-Skies. Years passed, and the power of Cû’jara-Cinmoi and the High Mansion of Siöl waxed. The Mansion of Nihrimsul was subdued, and her King, Sin’niroiha, “First Among Peoples,” was forced to wash the sword of Cû’jara-Cinmoi. With the subsequent conquest of Cil-Aujas to the south, Siöl and her High King commanded an empire that ranged from the Yimaleti Mountains to the Sea of Meneanor.  During this time, the Watch was kept on the Ark. The land cooled. The skies cleared. Either because of original inconsistencies or because of subsequent corruptions, extant versions of the Isûphiryas are unclear as to the subsequent order of events. At some point a secret embassy of Inchoroi reached Nin’janjin at Viri. Unlike the Inchoroi brought to Cû’jara-Cinmoi by Ingalira, these possessed the ability to speak Ihrimsû. They reminded Nin’janjin of Cû’jara-Cinmoi’s treachery in his time of need, and offered an alliance to break the yoke of Siöl over Viri. They would undo, the Inchoroi said, the misfortune their coming had wrought upon the Cûnuroi of Viri. Despite the warnings of his Ishroi, Nin’janjin accepted the Inchoroi terms. Viri revolted. The Siölan Ishroi within its halls were slain; the rest were enslaved. At the same time, the Inchoroi swarmed from the Ark, overwhelming the Watch. Only Oirinas and his twin, Oirûnas, survived, riding hard to warn Cû’jara-Cinmoi. Sil, the Inchoroi King, and Nin’janjin assembled their hosts to meet Cû’jara-Cinmoi on the fields of Pir-Pahal, which Men would call Eleneöt in a later age. According to the Isûphiryas, the Nonmen of Viri were dismayed by the sight of their allies, who wore fierce and
Cûnuroi::See Nonmen.
“Cut from them their tongues ...”::The famous phrase from The Chronicle of the Tusk condemning sorcery and sorcerers.
Cynnea, Braelwan, Braelwan Cynnea::(4059-4111)—The Galeoth Earl of Agmundr, claimed by disease at Caraskand.
Dagliash::The ancient Aörsic fortress overlooking the River Sursa and the Plains of Agongorea. It changed hands several times in the wars preceding the Apocalypse. See Apocalypse.
Daimos::Also known as noömancy. The sorcery of summoning and enslaving agencies from the Outside. For both political and pragmatic reasons, many Schools forbid its practice. Some esoteric scholars claim that Daimotic sorcerers condemn themselves to eternal torment at the hands of their erstwhile slaves when they die.
Dakyas::A semi-mountainous district of Nilnamesh.
Dameöri Wilderness, Dameöri::A vast tract of forested, Sranc-infested wilderness extending from the Tydonni frontier in the south and running northeast of the Osthwai Mountains to the Sea of Cerish.
Dark Hunter::A common epithet for Husyelt, the God of the Hunt.
the darkness which comes before::A phrase used by the Dûnyain to refer to the congenital blindness of individuals to the worldly causes that drive them, both historical and appetitive. See Dûnyain.
Daskas, House Daskas::One of the Houses of the Congregate.
Daybreak::Achamian’s mule.
Dayrut::A small fortress in the Gedean interior, built by the Nansur after the fall of Shigek to the Fanim in 3933.
Dead-God::See Lokung.
A Defence of the Arcane Arts::The famed sorcerous apologia of Zarathinius, which is as widely cited by philosophers as by sorcerers because of its pithy critiques not only of the Inrithi prohibition of sorcery but of Inrithism itself. The work has long been banned by the Thousand Temples.
Demua Mountains, Demua::An extensive range located in northwestern Eärwa, forming the frontier between Injor-Niyas and what was once Kûniüri.
denotaries::In Gnostic sorcery, the “primer” Cants given to students to practise “dividing their voice,” which is to say, saying and thinking two separate things.
Detnammi, Hirul::(4081-4111)—The Palatine of the Ainoni province of Eshkalas, slain at Subis under dishonourable circumstances.
Dialogues of Inceruti::One of the most famous “missing works” of Far Antiquity, frequently referenced by Ajencis.
Dinchases, Bloody Dinch::(4074-4111)—A Captain of Attrempus and lifelong comrade-in-arms to Krijates Xinemus, slain at Iothiah. Also known as “Bloody Dinch.”
Doff your sandals and shod the earth::A common saying meant to remind listeners not to project their failings onto others.
Domyot::(Sheyic version of “Torumyan”) Also known as the Black Iron City. The administrative capital of Zeüm, famed for the cruelty of its rulers and for its iron-skirted walls. For most in the Three Seas, Domyot is as much a place of legend as Golgotterath.
Dragons::See Wracu.
Dreams::The nightmares experienced by Mandate Schoolmen of the Apocalypse as witnessed through Seswatha’s eyes.
Dunjoksha::(4055- )—The Sapatishah-Governor of Holy Amoteu.
Dûnyain::A severe monastic sect that has repudiated history and animal appetite in the name of finding enlightenment through the control of all desire and all circumstance. Though the origins of the Dûnyain are obscure (many think them the descendants of the ecstatic sects that arose across the Ancient North in the days preceding the Apocalypse), their belief system is utterly unique, leading some to conclude their original inspiration had to be philosophical rather than religious in any traditional sense. Much of Dûnyain belief follows from their interpretation of what they consider their founding principles. The Empirical Priority Principle (sometimes referred to as the Principle of Before and After) asserts that within the circle of the world, what comes before determines what comes after without exception. The Rational Priority Principle asserts that Logos, or Reason, lies outside the circle of the world (though only in a formal and not an ontological sense). The Epistemological Principle asserts that knowing what comes before (via the Logos) yields “control” of what comes after. Given the Priority Principle, it follows that thought, which falls within the circuit of the before and after, is also determined by what comes before. The Dûnyain therefore believe the will to be illusory, an artifact of the soul’s inability to perceive what comes before it. The soul, in the Dûnyain world view, is part of the world, and therefore as much driven by prior events as anything else. (This stands in stark contrast to the dominant stream of Three Seas and Ancient North thought, where the soul is taken to be, in Ajencis’s words, “that which precedes everything.”) In other words, Men do not possess “self-moving souls.” Far from a given, such a soul is an accomplishment for the Dûnyain. All souls, they claim, possessconatus, the natural striving to be self-moving, to escape the circle of before and after. They naturally seek to know the world about them and so climb out of the circle. But a host of factors make outright escape impossible. The soul men are born with is too obtuse and clouded by animal passions to be anything other than a slave of what comes before. The whole point of the Dûnyain ethos is to overcome these limitations and so become a self-moving soul—to attain what they call the Absolute, or the Unconditioned Soul. But unlike those exotic Nilnameshi sects devoted to various other forms of “enlightenment,” the Dûnyain are not so naive as to think this can be attained within the course of a single lifetime. They think of this, rather, as a multi-generational process. Quite early on they recognized that the instrument itself, the soul, was flawed, so they instituted a program of selective breeding for intellect and dispassion. In a sense the entire sect became a kind of experiment, isolated from the world to maintain control, with each prior generation training the next to the limit of their capabilities, the idea being that over the millennia they would produce souls that could climb further and further from the circle of before and after. The hope was that eventually they would produce a soul utterly transparent to Logos, a soul capable of apprehending all the darknesses that come before.
Dûnyanic::The language of the Dûnyain, which remains very close to the original Kûniüri from which it is derived.
Eämnor::A lost White Norsirai nation of the Ancient North. The roots of Eämnor reach back to the days of Aulyanau the Conqueror and the Cond Yoke. In 927, Aulyanau conquered the fortress of Ara-Etrith (“New Etrith”) and, struck by the anarcane characteristics of Mount Ankulakai, settled several Cond tribes in the vicinity. These tribes flourished, and under the influence of the nearby cities of the Aumris they quickly abandoned their pastoral ways. In fact the Cond were so effectively assimilated into Aumris culture that their White Norsirai cousins, the Scintya, took them for High Norsirai during the time of the Scintya Yoke (1228-1381). Eämnor proper emerged from the Scintya Yoke as one of the pre-eminent nations of the Ancient North. Though laid waste in 2148, Eämnor could be considered the sole surviving nation of the Apocalypse, insofar as Atrithau survived. Due to the concentrations of Sranc, however, Atrithau has never been able to recover more than a fraction of the lands constituting historical Eämnor.
Eämnoric::The lost language of ancient Eämnor, a derivative of Condic.
Eänna::“[Land of the] Uplifted Sun” (Thoti-Eännorean) The traditional name of all the lands to the east of the Great Kayarsus.
Eärwa::“[Land of the] Felled Sun” (Thoti-Eännorean) The traditional name of all the lands to the west of the Great Kayarsus.
Ebara::A small fortress in the Gedean interior, built by the Nansur after the fall of Shigek to the Fanim in 3933.
Ecosium Market::The main “wares market” of Sumna, located just south of the Hagerna.
Ej’ulkiyah::A Khirgwi name for the Carathay Desert meaning “Great Thirst.”
Ekyannus I::(2304-72)—The first “institutional” Shriah of the Thousand Temples, and the author of the widely admired 44 Epistles.
Ekyannus III::“the Golden” (2432-2516)—The Shriah of the Thousand Temples who converted Triamis the Great in 2505 and thus
assured the predominance of Inrithism in the Three Seas.
Eleäzaras, Hanamanu Eleäzaras::(4060- )—The Grandmaster of the Scarlet Spires.
Eleneöt, Fields of Eleneöt::See Battle of Eleneöt Fields.
elju::The Ihrimsû word for “book,” referring to someone, either Man or Sranc, who accompanies a Nonman to aid with his failing memory.
Empire-behind-the-Mountains::A Scylvendi name for the Nansurium.
Emwama::The indigenous Men of Eärwa, who, as slaves of the Nonmen, were massacred by the Five Tribes following the Breaking of the Gates. Very little is known of them.
Enathpaneah::A governorate of Kian and former province of the Nansur Empire. Located at the hinge of Khemema and Xerash, Enathpaneah is a semi-mountainous, semi-arid land whose wealth is predominantly derived from the caravans that pass through Caraskand, its administrative and commercial capital.
Ennutil::A Scylvendi tribe of the northwestern Steppe.
Enshoiya::Sheyic for “certainty.” The Zaudunyani name for the Warrior-Prophet’s sword.
ensolarii::The base monetary unit of High Ainon.
Eöthic Garrison::The primary fortress and barracks of the Emperor’s personal guard, dominating Momemn’s northern quarter.
Eöthic Guard::The personal heavy infantry guard of the Nansur Emperors, consisting primarily of Norsirai mercenaries from Cepalor.
Epistemologies::A work oft attributed to Ajencis but more likely a redacted compilation drawn from his other works. Many consider it his definitive philosophical statement on the nature of knowledge, but some argue that it distorts his position since it presents a unitary vision of views that actually evolved quite dramatically over the course of his life.
Eritga::(4092-4111)—A Galeoth slave-girl belonging to Cutias Sarcellus, slain in the deserts of Khemema.
Eryeat, Coithus Eryeat::(4038- )—The King of Galeoth, and father of Coithus Saubon.
Eshganax::A Palatinate of High Ainon, located across the north Secharib Plains.
Eshkalas::A Palatinate of High Ainon, famed for the quality of its cotton, located on the western edge of the Secharib Plains.
Eumarna::The most populous governorate of Kian and former province of the Nansur Empire. Located to the south of the Betmulla Mountains, Eumarna is a large, fertile land that is primarily known for its exports of wine and horses.
Eumarni::The language of Eumarna, a derivative of ancient Mamati.
eunuchs::Men castrated either before or after the onset of puberty, but usually before. Eunuchs have become something of an informal caste in the Three Seas, both in the management of harems and also in high administrative posts, where their lack of progeny, the belief is, renders them more immune to influence and less likely to harbour dynastic ambitions.
Exalt-General::The traditional title of the Imperial Army’s supreme commander.
Exhortations::The sole surviving work of Hatatian. See Hatatian.
Expect not, and you shall find glory everlasting::The Tractate, Book of Priests, 8:31. The famed “Expect Not Admonition” of Inri Sejenus, where he urges his followers to give without hope of exchange. The paradox, of course, is that by doing this, they hope for eternal paradise in exchange.
Fallow Gate::The northernmost gate of Ishuäl.
Fama Palace::The residence and administrative seat of the Warrior-Prophet while the First Holy War remained in Caraskand, located on the Heights of the Bull.
Fanashila::(4092-)—One of Esmenet’s Kianene body-slaves.
Fanayal ab Kascamandri::(4075- )—The first-born son of the Padirajah, and leader of the Coyauri, his famed elite heavy cavalry.
Fane::(3669-3742)—The Prophet of the Solitary God and founder of Fanimry. Initially a Shrial Priest in the Nansur province of Eumarna, Fane was declared a heretic by the ecclesiastical courts of the Thousand Temples in 3703 and banished to certain death in the Carathay Desert. According to Fanim tradition, rather than dying in the desert, Fane went blind, experienced the series of revelations narrated in the kipfa’aifan, the “Witness of Fane,” and was granted miraculous powers (the same powers attributed to the Cishaurim) he called the Water of Indara. He spent the remainder of his life preaching to and consolidating the desert tribes of the Kianene, who after his death would launch the White Jihad under the leadership of Fane’s son, Fan’oukarji I.
Fanim::The name used by the Inrithi to refer to the followers of Fanimry.
Fanimry::A monotheistic faith founded upon the revelations of the Prophet Fane. The central tenets of Fanimry deal with the solitary nature and transcendence of the God, the falseness of the Gods (who are considered demons by the Fanim), the repudiation of the Tusk as unholy, and the prohibition of all representations of the God.
Fan’oukarji I::(3716-71)—“Peerless son of Fane” (Kianni) The son of the Prophet Fane and the first Padirajah of Kian. Fan’oukarji is credited with the fantastic success of the White Jihad against the Nansur Empire.
Far Antiquity::The historical period beginning with the Breaking of the Gates and ending with the Apocalypse in 2155. See Near Antiquity.
Feast of Kussapokari::A traditional Inrithi holiday marking the summer solstice.
fevers::A generic name for various forms of malaria.
Few, the few::Those born with the innate ability to sense the onta and work sorcery. See sorcery.
Finaöl, Weofota::(4066-4111)—The Earl of the Tydonni province of Canute, slain at Anwurat.
First and Final Word::A common epithet for the words of Inri Sejenus.
Five Tribes of Men::The five rough cultural and racial groups that migrated into the Eärwic subcontinent at the beginning of the Second Age; respectively, the Norsirai, the Ketyai, the Satyothi, the Scylvendi, and the Xiuhianni.
Flail, the Flail::A constellation in the northern sky.
flat-place::According to Scylvendi custom, the ideal spiritual state wherein the Scylvendi warrior, freed of all passion and desire, becomes the very expression of the land.
Forbidden Road::A secret military road connecting the Scylvendi and Kianene frontiers of the Nansur Empire.
44 Epistles::The magnum opus of Ekyannus I, consisting of forty-four “letters” written to the God, including commentary and confession as well as philosophical inquiry and critique.
Fourth Analytic of Men::Also known as The Book of Maxims. One of the more famous works of Ajencis, containing several hundred not so very flattering “Observations of Men” and the corresponding maxim outlining the practical way to deal with each of the Men so observed.
The Fourth Dialogue of the Movements of the Planets as They Pertain to Astrology::One of the famed “lost works” of Ajencis.
Fustaras::(4061-4111)—An Orthodox agitator and proadjunct from the Selial Column.
